Using the Simplified Method 

The simplified method is an alternative to the calculation, allocation,
and substantiation of actual expenses. In most cases, you will figure your deduction by multiplying
$5, the prescribed rate, by the area of your home used for a qualified business use. The area you
use to figure your deduction is limited to 300 square feet. See Simplified Amount, later, for
information about figuring the amount of the deduction. For more information about the simplified
method, see Revenue Procedure 2013-13, 2013-06 I.R.B. 478, available at
IRS.gov/irb/2013-06_IRB#RP-2013-13. Actual expenses and depreciation of your home. If you
elect to use the simplified method, you cannot deduct any actual expenses for the business except
for business expenses that are not related to the use of the home. You also cannot deduct any
depreciation (including any additional first-year depreciation) or section 179 expense for the
portion of the home that is used for a qualified business use. The depreciation deduction allowable
for that portion of the home is deemed to be zero for a year you use the simplified method. If you
figure your deduction for business use of the home using actual expenses in a subsequent year,
you will have to use the appropriate optional depreciation table for MACRS to figure your
depreciation. More information. For more information about claiming depreciation in a subsequent
year, see Revenue Procedure 2013-13, 2013-06 I.R.B. 478, available at
IRS.gov/irb/2013-06_IRB#RP-2013-13. See Pub. 946 for the optional depreciation tables. Tip:
Although you cannot deduct any depreciation or section 179 expense for the portion of your home
used for a qualified business use, you may still claim depreciation or the section 179 expense
deduction on other assets used in the business (for example, furniture and equipment). Expenses
deductible without regard to business use. When using the simplified method, treat as personal
expenses your mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and casualty losses. If you also rent part of
your home, you must still allocate these expenses between rental use and personal use (for this
purpose, personal use includes business use reported using the simplified method). No deduction
of carryover of actual expenses. If you used actual expenses to figure your deduction for business
use of the home in a prior year and your deduction was limited, you cannot deduct the disallowed
amount carried over from the prior year during a year you figure your deduction using the
simplified method. Instead, you will continue to carry over the disallowed amount to the next year
that you use actual expenses to figure your deduction. 

Electing the Simplified Method

You choose
whether or not to figure your deduction using the simplified method each tax year. Make the
election for a home by using the simplified method to figure the deduction for the qualified
business use of that home on a timely filed, original federal income tax return. An election for a tax
year, once made, is irrevocable. A change from using the simplified method in one year to actual
expenses in a succeeding tax year, or vice versa, is not a change in method of accounting and
does not require the consent of the Commissioner. Shared use. If you share your home with
someone else who also uses the home in a business that qualifies for this deduction, each of you
makes your own election. More than one qualified business use. If you conduct more than one
business that qualifies for this deduction in your home, your election to use the simplified method
applies to all your qualified business uses of that home. More than one home. If you used more
than one home in your business during the year (for example, you moved during the year), you
can elect to use the simplified method for only one of the homes. You must figure the deduction for
any other home using actual expenses.

Simplified Amount

Your deduction for the qualified
business use of a home is the sum of each amount you figure for a separate qualified business
use of your home. To figure your deduction for the business use of a home using the simplified
method, 
you will need to know the following information for each
qualified business use of the home. • The allowable area of your home used in conducting the
business. If you did not conduct the business for the entire year in the home or the area changed
during the year, you will need to know the allowable area you used and the number of days you
conducted the business for each month. • The gross income from the business use of your home.
• The amount of the business expenses that are not re lated to the use of your home. • If the
qualified business use is for a daycare facility that uses space in your home on a regular (but not
exclusive) basis, you will need to know the percentage of time that part of your home is used for
daycare. To figure the amount you can deduct for qualified business use of your home using the
simplified method, follow these three steps. 1. Multiply the allowable area by $5 (or less than $5 if
the qualified business use is for a daycare that uses space in your home on a regular, but not
exclusive, basis). See Allowable area and Space used regularly for daycare, later. 2. Subtract the
expenses from the business that are not related to the use of the home from the gross income
related to the business use of the home. If these expenses are greater than the gross income from
the business use of the home, then you cannot take a deduction for this business use of the home.
See Gross income limitation, later. 3. Take the smaller of the amounts from (1) and (2). This is the
amount you can deduct for this qualified business use of your home using the simplified method. If
you are a partner or you use your home in your farming business and file Schedule F (Form 1040),
you can use the Simplified Method Worksheet, near the end of this publication, to help you figure
your deduction. If you use your home in a trade or business and you file Schedule C (Form 1040),
you will use the Simplified Method Worksheet in your Instructions for Schedule C to figure your
deduction. Allowable area. In most cases, the allowable area is the smaller of the actual area (in
square feet) of your home used in conducting the business and 300 square feet. Your allowable
area may be smaller if you conducted the business as a qualified joint venture with your spouse,
the area used by the business was shared with another qualified business use, you used the home
for the business for only part of the year, or the area used by the business changed during the
year. You can use the Area Adjustment Worksheet (for simplified method), near the end of this
publication, to help you figure your allowable area for a qualified business use. Area used by a
qualified joint venture. If the qualified business use of the home is also a qualified joint venture,
you and your spouse will figure the deduction for the business use separately. Split the actual area
used in conducting business between you and your spouse in the same manner you split your
other tax attributes. Then each spouse will figure the allowable area separately. For more
information about qualified joint ventures, see Qualified Joint Venture in the Instructions for
Schedule C. Shared use. If you share your home with someone else who uses the home to
conduct business that also qualifies for this deduction, you may not include the same square feet
to figure your deduction as the other person. You must allocate the shared space between you
and the other person in a reasonable manner. Example. Lindsey and Tracy are roommates.
Lindsey uses 300 square feet of their home for a qualified business use. Tracy uses 200 square
feet of their home for a separate qualified business use. Lindsey and Tracy both share 100 square
feet for their respective qualified businesses in their mutual home. In addition to the portion that
they do not share, Lindsey and Tracy can both claim 50 of the 100 square feet or divide the 100
square feet between them in any reasonable manner. If divided evenly, Lindsey could claim 250
square feet using the simplified method and Tracy could claim 150 square feet. More than one
qualified business use. If you conduct more than one business qualifying for the deduction, you
are limited to a maximum of 300 square feet for all of the businesses. Allocate the actual square
footage used (up to the maximum of 300 square feet) among your qualified business uses in a
reasonable manner. However, do not allocate more square feet to a qualified business use than
you actually use for that business. Rental use. The simplified method does not apply to rental use.
A rental use that qualifies for the deduction must be figured using actual expenses. If the rental
use and a qualified business use share the same area, you will have to allocate the actual area
used between the two uses. You cannot use the same area to figure a deduction for the qualified
business use as you are using to figure the deduction for the rental use. Part-year use or area
changes (for simplified method only). If your qualified business use was for a portion of the year
(for example, a seasonal business, a business that begins during the year, or you moved during
the year) or you changed the square footage of your qualified business use, your deduction is
limited to the average monthly allowable square footage. You calculate the average monthly
allowable square footage by adding the amount of allowable square feet you used in each month
and dividing the sum by 12. When determining the average monthly allowable square footage,
you cannot take more than 300 square feet into account for any 1 month. Additionally, if your
qualified business use was less than 15 days in a month, you must use -0- for that month.
11 Example 1. Jay owns a home and files federal income taxes on a
calendar year basis. On July 20, Jay began using 420 square feet at the home for a qualified
business use. Jay continued to use 420 square feet of the home until the end of the year. The
average monthly allowable square footage is 125 square feet, which is figured using 300 square
feet for each month, August through December, divided by the number of months in the year ((0 +
0 + 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 + 300 + 300 + 300 + 300 + 300)/12). Example 2. Jessie owns a home and
files federal income taxes on a calendar year basis. On April 20, Jessie began using 100 square
feet of the home for a qualified business use. On August 5, Jessie expanded the area of qualified
use to 330 square feet. Jessie continued to use the 330 square feet until the end of the year. The
average monthly allowable square footage is 150 square feet, which is figured using 100 square
feet for May through July and 300 square feet for August through December, divided by the
number of months in the year ((0 + 0 + 0 + 0 + 100 + 100 +100 + 300 + 300 + 300 + 300 +
300)/12). Example 3. Guadalupe owns a home and files federal income taxes on a calendar year
basis. From January 1 through July 16, Guadalupe used 300 square feet of the home for a
qualified business use. On July 17, Guadalupe moved to a new home and immediately began
using 200 square feet for the same qualified business use. While preparing a 2025 tax return,
Guadalupe decided to use the simplified method to deduct the qualified business use of the first
home and files Form 8829 to deduct the qualified business use of the second home. The average
monthly allowable square footage is 175 square feet, which is figured using 300 square feet for
January through July, divided by the number of months in the year ((300 + 300 + 300 + 300 + 300
+ 300 + 300 + 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 + 0)/ 12). Caution: If you moved during the year, your average
allowable square footage will generally be less than 300. Gross income limitation. Your deduction
for business use of the home is limited to an amount equal to the gross income derived from the
qualified business use of the home reduced by the business deductions that are unrelated to the
use of your home. If the business deductions that are unrelated to the use of your home are
greater than the gross income derived from the qualified business use of your home, then you
cannot take a deduction for this qualified business use of your home. Business expenses not
related to use of the home. These expenses relate to the business activity in the home, but not to
the use of the home itself. You can still deduct business expenses that are unrelated to the use of
the home. See Where To Deduct, later. Examples of business expenses that are unrelated to the
use of the home are advertising, wages, supplies, dues, and depreciation for equipment. Space
used regularly for daycare. If you do not use the area of your home exclusively for daycare, you
must reduce the prescribed rate (maximum $5 per square foot) before figuring your deduction. The
reduced rate will equal the prescribed rate times a fraction. The numerator of the fraction is the
number of hours that the space was used during the year for daycare and the denominator is the
total number of hours during the year that the space was available for all uses. You can use the
Daycare Facility Worksheet (for simplified method), near the end of this publication, to help you
figure the reduced rate. Tip: If you used at least 300 square feet for daycare regularly and
exclusively during the year, then you do not need to reduce the prescribed rate or complete the
Day care Facility Worksheet.