Figuring the Deduction

After you determine that you meet the tests under Qualifying for a Deduction, you can begin to
figure how much you can deduct. When figuring the amount you can deduct for the business use
of your home, you will use either your actual expenses or a simplified method. Electing to use the
simplified method. The simplified method is an alternative to the calculation, allocation, and
substantiation of actual expenses. You choose whether or not to figure your deduction using the
simplified method each tax year. See Using the Simplified Method, later. 

Using Actual Expenses 

If you do not or cannot elect to use the simplified method for a home, you will figure your deduction
for that home using your actual expenses. You will also need to figure the percentage of your
home used for business and the limit on the deduction. If you are a partner or you use your home
in your farming business and you file Schedule F (Form 1040), you can use the Worksheet To
Figure the Deduction for Business Use of Your Home, near the end of this publication, to help you
figure your deduction. If you use your home in a trade or business and you file Schedule C (Form
1040), you will use Form 8829 to figure your deduction. 

Actual Expenses 

You must divide the
expenses of operating your home between personal and business use. The part of a home
operating expense you can use to figure your deduction depends on both of the following.
•Whether the expense is direct, indirect, or unrelated. • The percentage of your home used for
business. Table 1 describes the types of expenses you may have and the extent to which they are
deductible.

Table 1. Types of Expenses (IRS Publication 587)

Direct expenses are expenses only for the business part of your home 
(examples: painting or repairs only in the area used for business). 
Direct expenses are deductible in full, except they may be only 
partially deductible in a daycare facility.

Indirect expenses are expenses for keeping up and running your entire 
home (examples: insurance, utilities, and general repairs). Indirect 
expenses are deductible based on the percentage of your home used for 
business.

Unrelated expenses are expenses only for the parts of your home not 
used for business (examples: lawn care or painting a room not used 
for business). Unrelated expenses are not deductible.

Note: deductibility of direct and indirect expenses is subject to the 
deduction limit, discussed later.

Certain expenses are deductible to the extent they would have been deductible as an itemized
deduction on your Schedule A or, if claiming the standard deduction, would have increased your
standard deduction had you not used your home for business. If the expense is indirect, use the
business percentage of these expenses to figure how much to include in your total
business-use-of-the-home deduction. If you are itemizing your deductions on Schedule A (Form
1040), these expenses include the following. • Real estate taxes. • Home mortgage interest. •
Casualty losses attributable to a federally declared disaster. 
If you are
claiming the standard deduction, these expenses only include net qualified disaster losses that
increase your standard deduction. See the Instructions for the Worksheet To Figure the Deduction
for Business Use of Your Home, later in this publication, or the Instructions for Form 8829 for more
information about figuring and deducting the business part of these otherwise allowable
expenses. For more information about deducting real estate taxes, see Pub. 530. For more
information about deducting home mortgage interest, see Pub. 936. For more information about
deducting casualty losses, see Pub. 547. Other expenses are deductible only if you use your
home for business. If the expense is indirect, use the business percentage of these expenses to
figure how much to include in your total business-use-of-the-home deduction. These expenses
generally include (but are not limited to) the following. • Casualty losses not attributable to a
federally declared disaster. • Depreciation (discussed under Home, later). • Insurance
•Rent paid for the use of property you do not own but use in your trade or
business. • Repairs. • Security system. • Utilities and services. (But see Telephone, later, for
different rules that apply to telephone expenses.)